blog post (#1539)
graphql/graphql.github.io: src/content/blog/2023-08-25-graphql-fusion.md

## Expectations

We believe that distributed GraphQL services — or composite GraphQL services — should be straightforward to set up and seamlessly integrate with the diverse range of CI/CD tools, schema registries, composition utilities, and gateways that enterprises might prefer. The current landscape should not dictate the choice of tools but provide flexibility.

Up to this point, the GraphQL landscape has lacked an open specification tailored for distributed setups – a framework designed from the ground up for extensibility and integration with diverse toolchains. We envisioned a platform where tools from various vendors could effortlessly work in tandem, ensuring that developers and enterprises never feel constrained by their technical choices.

## Let's share and compete

> Late last year, [ChilliCream](https://chillicream.com) and [The Guild](https://the-guild.dev/) met in Paris and discussed their approaches towards distributed GraphQL. It became clear that both companies were solving similar problems, and we decided to join forces on this project. ChilliCream would provide the initial work on the Fusion spec and implementation. At the same time, The Guild would start specifying their work on [GraphQL Mesh Gateway](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/mesh) with [OpenAPI support](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/mesh/docs/handlers/openapi) and help shape the initial Fusion spec. As we started, work on prototypes and the initial spect texts, we reached out to more companies in the community to see if there was interest in collaboration. It turns out that the GraphQL community is hungry for an open specification to standardize distributed GraphQL application gateways. [Hasura](https://hasura.io/), [IBM](https://www.ibm.com/de-de), [solo.io](https://www.solo.io/), [AWS AppSync](https://aws.amazon.com/de/appsync/), [WunderGraph](https://wundergraph.com/) have all joined the effort for creating a common spec.

Reviewer: Link for IBM has localisation in it, this can be deleted :)

Author: This is now fixed.

![Simple Deployment Pipeline](/img/blog/2023-08-25-graphql-fusion/pipeline-1.png)

## Apollo Federation

We recognize that some of you may have opted into Apollo Federation as a solution, and that is why we designed the Fusion schema composition so that it can compose any Apollo Federation subgraph into a Fusion subgraph. This allows you to seamlessly migrate from an Apollo Federation setup to a GraphQL-Fusion setup without the need to rewrite anything.

## Conclusion

> We are still working on GraphQL-Fusion, but you can try an early version already today with the Hot Chocolate Fusion Gateway. We plan to release the GraphQL-Fusion spec as it matures later this year under the **MIT license**. While the current iterations are primarily concerned with GraphQL, as mentioned before The Guild has begun specifying the Open API to GraphQL transformation they've developed in Mesh, and we'll integrate this as it becomes available. Hasura us working on GraphQL Compliant Data APIs spec and WunderGraph wants to contribute a spec for gRPC and Kafka (AsyncApi) to take federated GraphQL to a whole new level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are still working on GraphQL-Fusion, but you can try an early version already today with the Hot Chocolate Fusion Gateway. We plan to release the GraphQL-Fusion spec as it matures later this year under the GraphQL Foundation and as **MIT license**. While the current iterations are primarily concerned with GraphQL, as mentioned before The Guild, in collaboration with IBM and StepZen, has begun specifying the Open API to GraphQL transformation they've developed in Mesh, and we'll integrate this as it becomes available. Hasura is working on GraphQL Compliant Data APIs spec and WunderGraph wants to contribute a spec for gRPC and Kafka (AsyncApi) to take federated GraphQL to a whole new level.
```
